[DOCS-7627] Add OTel Kafka Metrics Docs (#21505)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/opentelemetry/integrations/kafka_metrics.md

---
title: Kafka Metrics
further_reading:
- link: "/opentelemetry/collector_exporter/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Setting Up the OpenTelemetry Collector"
---

<div class="alert alert-warning">
OTel Kafka Metrics Remapping is in public alpha. It is available in versions >= 0.93.0 of the collector. If you have feedback related to this, reach out your account team to provide your input.
</div>

## Overview

{{< img src="/opentelemetry/collector_exporter/kafka_metrics.png" alt="OpenTelemetry Kafka metrics in OOTB Kafka dashboard" style="width:100%;" >}}

> The [kafka metrics receiver][1], [JMX Receiver][2]/ [JMX Metrics Gatherer][3] allow collecting kafka metrics and access to the out of the box [Kafka Dashboard][7] "Kafka, Zookeeper and Kafka Consumer Overview". 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Kafka metrics receiver][1], [JMX Receiver][2]/ [JMX Metrics Gatherer][3] allow collecting Kafka metrics and access to the out of the box [Kafka Dashboard][7], "Kafka, Zookeeper and Kafka Consumer Overview". 
```

Please note the the [JMX Receiver][2] and [JMX Metrics Gatherer][3] should be considered as replacements. They collect the same set of metrics ([JMX Receiver][2] launches the [JMX Metrics Gatherer][3]).

## Kafka Metrics Receiver

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Host" %}}

```yaml
receivers:
  kafkametrics:
    brokers: "${env:KAFKA_BROKER_ADDRESS}"
    protocol_version: 2.0.0
    scrapers:
      - brokers
      - topics
      - consumers
```

{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Kubernetes" %}}

> The kafka metrics receiver needs to be used in a collector in `deployment` mode with a single replica. This ensures that the same metric is not collected multiple times. The collector in deployment mode can then leverage the Datadog Exporter to export the metrics directly to Datadog, or leverage the OTLP exporter to forward the metrics to another collector instance. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Kafka metrics receiver needs to be used in a collector in `deployment` mode with a single replica. This ensures that the same metric is not collected multiple times. The collector in deployment mode can then leverage the Datadog Exporter to export the metrics directly to Datadog, or leverage the OTLP exporter to forward the metrics to another collector instance. 
```

Add the following lines to `values.yaml`:
```yaml
mode: deployment
```

Add the following in the Collector configuration:

```yaml
receivers:
  kafkametrics:
    brokers: ${env:KAFKA_BROKER_ADDRESS}
    protocol_version: 2.0.0
    scrapers:
      - brokers
      - topics
      - consumers
```

{{% /tab %}}

{{< /tabs >}}

> ## JMX Receiver

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## JMX receiver
```

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Host" %}}

The JMX Receiver has the following requirements:

> - JRE is available on the host in which you are running the collector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- JRE is available on the host where you are running the collector.
```

In order to deploy this in kubernetes, you will need to build an image which contains JRE and the JMX Metrics Gatherer Jar. Please refer to the Dockerfile below for an example image that contains JRE and JMX Metrics Gatherer Jar.

Dockerfile:
```Dockerfile
FROM alpine:latest as prep

# JMX Metrics Gatherer Jar
ARG JMX_GATHERER_JAR_VERSION=1.27.0
ADD https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-java-contrib/releases/download/v${JMX_GATHERER_JAR_VERSION}/opentelemetry-jmx-metrics.jar /opt/opentelemetry-jmx-metrics.jar
# nonroot user id (https://groups.google.com/g/distroless-users/c/-DpzCr7xRDY/m/eQqJmJroCgAJ)
ARG USER_UID=65532
RUN chown ${USER_UID} /opt/opentelemetry-jmx-metrics.jar

FROM gcr.io/distroless/java17-debian11:nonroot

COPY --from=prep /opt/opentelemetry-jmx-metrics.jar /opt/opentelemetry-jmx-metrics.jar

EXPOSE 4317 55680 55679
ENTRYPOINT ["java"]
CMD ["-Dotel.jmx.service.url=service:jmx:rmi:///jndi/rmi://kafka:1099/jmxrmi", \
"-Dotel.jmx.target.system=kafka,jvm", \
"-Dotel.metrics.exporter=otlp", \
"-Dotel.exporter.otlp.endpoint=http://otelcol:4317", \
"-jar", \
"/opt/opentelemetry-jmx-metrics.jar"]
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{< /tabs >}}

> ## Log Collection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Log collection
```

See [Log Collection][4] for instructions on how to collect logs using the OpenTelemetry Collector.

> In order to appear in the OOTB Kafka Dashboard, the kafka logs need to be tagged with `source:kafka`. In order to do so, you can use an attributes processor:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To appear in the out-of-the-box Kafka Dashboard, the Kafka logs need to be tagged with `source:kafka`. To do this, use an attributes processor:
```

```yaml
processors:
  attributes:
    actions:
      - key: ddtags
        value: "source:kafka"
        action: insert
```

> In order to ensure this attribute only gets added to your kafka logs, you can use [include/exclude filtering][8] of the attributes processor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to ensure this attribute only gets added to your Kafka logs, use [include/exclude filtering][8] of the attributes processor.
```
